
Legal Principles and Boundary Law I
Welcome to Boundary Surveying Law! I’m excited to have you in this class and look forward to a productive and engaging semester. Together, we will explore principles, methods, and legal foundations involved in the practice of surveying property boundaries. Throughout the semester, you’ll gain profound knowledge in boundary law, learn to interpret legal descriptions, and understand the role of professional surveyors in boundary surveying. 
Whether you have started your career in land surveying or this is an early course in your academic path, this course will provide you with essential skills and knowledge. I'm looking forward to an engaging and practical learning experience with all of you. 
Please review the syllabus carefully to stay informed about course expectations, schedules, and requirements.

Name of Instructor: Ahmed Elaksher, PhD, PS, PE, CP

Office Location:  EC3 – 392

Email: elaksher@nmsu.edu Phone: 575-646-3504

Office Hours: TBD, Meetings through zoom: Meeting ID: 255 035 6862

Course: SUR 292 M70/U70

Credit Hours: 3

Delivery method: Online-asynchronous

Prerequisite(s): The prerequisite(s) for this course is: SUR222. 

Textbooks:
Brown’s Boundary Control and Legal Principles, 7th edition (2014) or newer. Robillard and Wilson. Publisher Wiley &amp; Sons, ISBN:978-1-118-43143-6 (cloth) ISBN: 978-1-118-75854-0 (ebook). (Required)
Writing Legal Descriptions, Writing Legal Descriptions, 4th edition (1979) by Gurdon H. Wattles. Publisher: Wattles Pubns. ISBN-10: 0960696288, ISBN-13: ‎ 978-0960696284.


Syllabus Modifications Statement
This syllabus is subject to revision to best fit the educational needs of the class. Any changes or modifications will be announced in class and/or on Canvas.



Student outcomes: On the successful completion of the course, the student should be able to: 
Describe elements of boundary laws 
Outline the different sources of laws
Interpret legal doctrines and Principles in property law
Analyze metes and bounds descriptions
Construct simultaneous and sequential descriptions of real property
Distinguish between riparian and littoral rights

Modules 
Learning outcomes
Module 1: Historical and current common law principles
Identify methods of creating boundary.
Differentiate between types of property estates and how common law doctrines influence modern boundary determination and ownership rights.
Recognize different types of deeds and their content.
Module 2: Sources of Laws and Related Presumptions
Differentiate between various sources of law their roles in boundary and property law.
Explain the function of legal presumptions and inferences in land surveying.
Identify the structure of the U.S. court system and the process by which legal cases progress and contribute to case law.
Module 3: Legal Doctrines / Principles in Property Law
Define various types of easements.
Differentiate between methods of creating easements.
Compare and contrast related property law concepts.
Module 4: Locating simultaneous conveyances
Explain the basic elements courts have developed to resolve conflicts in deeds
Differentiate between sequential and simultaneous conveyances.
Apply the order of importance for conflicting boundaries in different scenarios.
Module 5: Locating simultaneous conveyances
Identify the process of simultaneously creating boundaries.
Apply the concepts of proportioning excesses and deficiencies in subdivisions with simultaneous conveyances. 
Apply rules of construction for deed interpretation in combined conveyances and descriptions.
Module 6: Water rights
Differentiate between riparian and littoral rights.
Comprehend the historical evolution of water rights and understand how they influenced property ownership in the United States.
Compare and contrast the effects of shoreline changes to property boundaries.
Module 7: Creation of Metes and Bounds Descriptions 
Define key terms and principles used in metes and bounds land descriptions.
Construct accurate legal land descriptions using bearings, distances, and landmarks.
Evaluate metes and bounds descriptions for accuracy, legal sufficiency, and compliance with statutory requirements.
Course Schedule and Organization
Dates (2026)
Modules  &amp; Topic
Suggested reading from the textbook
Assignment deadline (2026)
May 27th
Syllabus

Participate in the discussion by June 2nd.
May 27th – June 2nd
Module 1: Historical and current common law principles
Chapters 1, 2, and 3
Submit Homework 1 and Quiz 1 by June 5th. 
June 3rd – June 5th
Module 2: Sources of Laws and Related Presumptions
Chapter 4
Submit Homework 2 and Quiz 2 by June 9th. 
June 6th -  June 9th
Module 3: Legal Doctrines / Principles in Property Law
Chapter 8
Submit Homework 3 and Quiz 3 by June 14th. 
June 10th – June 14th
Module 4: Locating simultaneous conveyances
Chapter 9
Submit Homework 4 and Quiz 4 by June 18th. 
June 15th – June 18th
Module 5: Locating simultaneous conveyances
Chapter 11
Submit Homework 5 and Quiz 5 by June 22nd. 
June 19th – July 22nd
Module 6: Water rights
Chapter 12
Submit Homework 6 and Quiz 6 by June 26th. 
June 22nd  – June 30th
Module 7: Creation of Metes and Bounds Descriptions 
Chapter 5
Submit Homework 7 and Quiz 7 by June 30th. 
In this course, we have 7 modules, in addition to the (Getting started) model. Each module has at least one PowerPoint presentation. There are other learning resources such as videos, articles, and websites. During each module, you will have a homework assignment. At the end of each module, there is a quiz and this quiz will be automatically graded. 
We will be using Canvas in this course. Please make sure you can navigate through Canvas and find and download the different materials. 
Please note that the dates of each module is my estimate for you to study the provided material, which includes reading the provided handouts and watching the provided videos. I then give you time to work on your assignments and submit them later. 
Assignments will open on the first day of the module but please note the deadlines for submitting your assignments and quizzes, as they might not match the beginning or ending of the week or next module. 
If you need more time, please contact me as soon as possible. Based on the circumstances, I might be able to extend the deadline if possible. 
The July 1st deadline is a hard deadline that I can’t since I have a deadline to submit the final grades. 
Quizzes have two attempts (drawn for a bank of questions), I will take the highest score. 
Quizzes are of different time limits and formats, but mainly multiple-choice questions.
Homework assignments are in different formats and most have optional items to answer.  


Grading Policy
Assignments
Weight
Discussion
5%
Quizzes (7 quizzes, the lowest quiz will be dropped)
60%
Homework assignments (7 homework(s), the lowest homework will be dropped)
35%
Total
100%
In the discussion, you should interact with other students by providing feedback. 
For any homework, you can submit a draft earlier, 48 hours before the deadline. I will review your submission and we can then meet through zoom to help you better understand the assignment, give you my comments, and answer any questions you might have.

Activities:
The activities you will be doing in the course are: studying PowerPoint slides, reading the textbook and reference material, watching educational videos, visiting websites to get information, answering short answer questions, and solving computational questions. 
Grading Criteria
Note: Grades in the course are assigned using Fractional Grading, 
Grade
Percentage
A+
97.5% to 100%
A
92.5% to &lt;97.5%
A-
90% to &lt;92.5%
B+
87.5% to &lt;90%
B
82.5% to &lt;87.5%
B-
80% to &lt;82.5%
C+
77.5% to &lt;80%
C
72.5% to &lt;77.5%
C-
70% to &lt;72.5%
D+
67.5% to &lt;70%
D
62.5% to &lt;67.5%
D-
60% to &lt;62.5%
F
&lt; 60%

Course Expectations
I will send urgent and regular communication to all students using the Canvas Inbox notification. You might also receive emails from my nmsu email: elaksher@nmsu.edu
It is a requirement in this class that you set your New Announcements in Notifications to “Right Away” to ensure that you receive any announcements. 
We will also interact via the discussions and the feedback I provide you for your assignments. 
You will interact with other students in the discussions. In your communication, I expect the following:
Professional and respectful tone and civility are used in communicating with fellow learners and the instructor.
Written communication, both formal and informal, uses Standard English rather than popular online abbreviations and regional colloquialisms.
Spelling and grammar are correct.
NOTE: The deadline for adding and dropping courses is different for full semester and mini semester courses. Visit https://records.nmsu.edu/students/important-dates.html.  

Online Preparation
Reading PowerPoint presentations and Word documents posted on Canvas.  The course is not self-paced and you will need feedback from the instructor before proceeding. I will be interacting with you through my feedback, zoom meetings, emails and phone. There are several parts in the course where you will need to navigate the internet to write essays, read required pages or articles, and watch recorded videos on YouTube and other places.

Required Technical Skills
Taking an online course requires a number of technical skills as well as other soft skills. However, at a minimum you will need to meet certain technology responsibilities to complete work for this course. If you have questions about technical requirements for the course, please contact me immediately.
To begin in this course, you must:
Read this syllabus carefully and contact me immediately if you have any questions. You are responsible for the content and assignments in this syllabus.
Be able to obtain access to an internet connection, preferably broadband, and a working computer for the duration of this course.
Be Proficient with Microsoft© Office applications.
Be able to conduct research searches on the Internet; see the NMSU Library.
Find resources on the Internet; see Internet Tutorials.
Be able to send and receive emails and email attachments in and out of class.
Know how to change your Canvas Notification settings.
Know how to read email in Canvas.
Maintain backups of all work you create for this course.

Netiquette
Online course expectations for netiquette are:
Don't flame (personally attack) someone. It is possible to disagree with an idea without flaming the person espousing the idea.
Use emoticons and acronyms to convey your emotional intent in order to avoid misunderstandings. 
Remember that the concept of "politeness" is defined for us by the families and cultures of which we are a part. What is considered polite communication in one family or culture may be impolite in another. Sometimes you may inadvertently seem impolite or feel that someone else was being impolite. Talk it out instead of assuming the person meant to be rude.
Listen actively.
Think critically. Critical thinking, grounded in intellectual integrity, is expected. In other words, seek clarity of meaning and understanding. 
Question ideas, not people.
Attempt to see things from other perspectives.
Use supporting relevant information.


Supported Software
Canvas LMS 
Zoom
Adobe Connect
Turnitin
EvaluationKIT

Computer and Operating System
4GB of RAM or higher
Dual Core 2GHz or higher (Intel Core i5 processor or equivalent)
Microphone (built-in, wired, USB, wireless or Bluetooth)
Web camera (built-in or USB)
Operating System:
Windows 10 or higher
OS X 10.13 or higher
Internet
Broadband connection (25 Mbps download, 3Mbps upload)
Wired connection (ethernet) preferred
Stable wireless connection is acceptable
Use the NMSU Checs Speedtest to test your internet speed
Web Browsers
Latest two versions of Chrome
Latest two versions of Firefox
Javascript must be enabled
Use only the latest version of Google Chrome or Mozilla Firefox for Canvas. Safari, Internet Explorer and Microsoft Edge have known issues that can interfere with performing basic tasks within Canvas. 

Accessibility of eLearning Tools
Some general or common VPAT links.  
Adobe Products: Section 508 VPATs for (Adobe Connect 9, Adobe Acrobat, and more)
Apple Products: Section 508 VPATs for (Safari Web Browser, Mac OS X, and more)
Microsoft Products: Section 508 VPATs for  (Internet Explorer, Office, Skype, and more)
Google Products: Section 508 VPATs for (Google Earth, Chrome Web Browser, Google Docs, and more)
Firefox Web Browser: Section 508 VPAT (version 3.5 and up)
Technical Support
The ICT Customer Service Center is equipped to deal with all of your information technology (IT) and telecommunications needs at NMSU. The ICT Customer Service Center hours of operation are from 8:00 am until 5:00 pm Monday through Friday Mountain Time. Please feel free to contact them at 646-1840 or via e-mail at helpdesk@nmsu.edu.You can also go to the Student Technology Help web page and Student Resources located at the Canvas web page for additional information on Canvas.


Use of AI
Broader Use of Generative AI Permitted within Guidelines Use of AI tools is permitted in this course for students who wish to use them. Students must cite any AI-generated material that informed their work (this includes in-text citations and/or use of quotations, and in your references list). Using an AI tool to generate content without proper attribution qualifies as academic dishonesty. 
Be careful as some AI tools might give you incorrect answers for some questions.  


Email Communications
Your NMSU email account is the official means of communicating with the university. Information critical to your success at NMSU is delivered to you via this account, and you are expected to follow rules and policies provided to you via this communication method. Any email from you to the instructor should be sent either through the CANVAS course management system or through your official NMSU email account. Please be advised that due to privacy and security concerns, we are unable to respond to emails from or about students that do not originate from an official NMSU email address. 

Plagiarism
Plagiarism is using another person’s work without acknowledgment, making it appear to be one’s own. Intentional and unintentional instances of plagiarism are considered instances of academic misconduct and are subject to disciplinary action such as failure on the assignment, failure of the course or dismissal from the university. The NMSU Library has more information and help on how to avoid plagiarism at http://lib.nmsu.edu/plagiarism/ 
  

Student Services and University Policies
Please visit https://syllabus.nmsu.edu/student_resources_policy.html for university policies and student services, including Discrimination and Disability Accommodation, academic misconduct, student services, final exam schedule, grading policies and more. 

Student Support Services
Campus Tutoring offers tutoring for individual and small groups for in-demand courses. Information can be found at https://campustutoring.nmsu.edu
The Writing Center offers free advising on aspects of proofreading and editing, but do not provide editing services. Visit https://townc.nmsu.edu for more information.
The Office of Military and Veterans Programs provides services to current and former service members. (https://mvp.nmsu.edu/)
The Aggie Cupboard is NMSU's food pantry. Visit https://aggiecupboard.nmsu.edu
Technical Support is offered through the ICT Customer Service Center. You can contact them at 575-646-1840 or by emailing helpdesk@nmsu.edu

Discrimination and Disability Accommodation
Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 and the Americans with Disabilities Act Amendments Act (ADA) covers issues relating to disability and accommodations. If a student has questions or needs an accommodation in the classroom (all medical information is treated confidentially), contact for Main Campus 
Disability Access Services
Corbett Center Student Union Room 204
Aaron Salas, Director
575-646-6840das@nmsu.edu 

New Mexico State University, in compliance with applicable laws and in furtherance of its commitment to fostering an environment that welcomes and embraces diversity, does not discriminate on the basis of age, ancestry, color, disability, gender identity, genetic information, national origin, race, religion, retaliation, serious medical condition, sex (including pregnancy), sexual orientation, spousal affiliation, or protected veteran status in its programs and activities, including employment, admissions, and educational programs and activities. You may submit a report online at equity.nmsu.edu. If you have an urgent concern, please contact the Office of Institutional Equity at 575-646-3635.  Title IX prohibits sex harassment, sexual assault, dating and domestic violence, stalking and retaliation. For more information on discrimination or Title IX, or to file a complaint contact:
Office of Institutional Equity (OIE) - O'Loughlin House, 1130 University Avenue Phone: (575) 646-3635 E-mail: equity@nmsu.edu Office of Institutional Equity Website
  
Other NMSU Resources:
NMSU Police Department:
(575) 646-3311
www.nmsupolice.com
NMSU Aggie Health &amp; Wellness (Medical and counseling services):
(575) 646-1512
https://wellness.nmsu.edu/
NMSU Dean of Students:
(575) 646-1722

For Any On-campus Emergencies:
911

Syllabus Addendum
Important Dates &amp; NMSU Academic Calendar (including mini-semester dates): https://records.nmsu.edu/students/important-dates.html 

University Grading System
The University Grading System is outlined in ARP 4.55. Instructors can decide if their course is graded using fractional grading (pluses and minuses). At the request of the student, the instructor will provide information on progress in the course prior to the last day to drop a course. 

Religious Observances and Authorized Absences
NMSU values diversity and the university supports cultural and religious inclusiveness. If your participation in cultural or religious observances (e.g. religious holidays, spiritual observances) conflicts with a particular class session, please notify the instructor in writing and ahead of time to be excused from class for such observances. 

S/U Grading Option 
Students enrolling under the S/U grading option must earn a specific grade as designated by the instructor to receive an “S”.  Students must elect the grading option prior to the last day to add a class.  See ARP 4.55 Part 2 for more information. 

Incomplete Grades
Under university policy, incompletes may be given only if a student has a passing grade at mid-semester (the last day to withdraw from a class) and is precluded from successful completion of the second half of the course by a documented illness, documented death, family crisis or other similar circumstances beyond the student's control. Visit ARP 4.55 Part 2, Letter D for more information. 

Class Recording
Class lectures can be recorded and are covered by ARP 11.05, Part 2, Letter I. These recordings should not be distributed by anyone other than the instructor. 

Academic Misconduct
The Student Code of Conduct defines academic misconduct, non-academic misconduct and the consequences or penalties for each. The Student Code of Conduct is available in the NMSU Student Handbook online http://studenthandbook.nmsu.edu/ Academic misconduct is explained here: https://studentlife.nmsu.edu/academic_integrity/academic_misconduct.html Academic misconduct is governed by ARP Policy 5.10. (https://arp.nmsu.edu/5-10/).   

