
For this homework, apply California Civil Code 670 and 830 if needed. 

California Code, Civil Code - CIV § 670: 
The State is the owner of all land below tide water, and below ordinary high-water mark, bordering upon tide water within the State; of all land below the water of a navigable lake or stream; of all property lawfully appropriated by it to its own use; of all property dedicated to the State; and of all property of which there is no other owner.
https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displaySection.xhtml?lawCode=CIV&amp;sectionNum=%5b670.%5d 

California Code, Civil Code - CIV § 830: 
Except where the grant under which the land is held indicates a different intent, the owner of the upland, when it borders on tide water, takes to ordinary high-water mark; when it borders upon a navigable lake or stream, where there is no tide, the owner takes to the edge of the lake or stream, at low-water mark; when it borders upon any other water, the owner takes to the middle of the lake or stream.
https://leginfo.legislature.ca.gov/faces/codes_displaySection.xhtml?lawCode=CIV&amp;sectionNum=%5b830.%5d 

Question 1:  (10 points)
Use the diagram on the next page to answer the problems below:
Answer only five problems out of the 6 problems, 1 through 6, (each problem 2 points one for the answer and one for explaining the answer)
Your client is considering purchasing a lot in Fisherman Acres Subdivision and the attorney for your client has asked for your opinion in determining the following.
The deeds for Lot Band Lot E both call to Salmon River. If the channel gradually changed location, what effect, if any, would this have on the common boundary of the two lots? Briefly explain your answer. 
The deeds for Lot Band Lot E both call to Salmon River. The location of the channel changed during the 1997 "El Nino" flood. What effect, if any, would this have on the common boundary of the two lots? Briefly explain your answer. 
The deed for Lot A calls to Bass Bay. Describe the northerly property line of Lot A. Briefly explain your answer. 
The deed for Lot C calls to Trout Lake. Describe the southerly boundary of Lot C. Briefly explain your answer. 
The deeds for Lot C and Lot D both call to Bear Creek. Describe the easterly boundary of Lot C. Briefly explain your answer. 
If Pike Island was formed during the 1997 "El Nino" flood, who would own theisland? Briefly explain your answer.











Question 2: (10 points)
For only FIVE parcels from parcels A through G in the diagram below, describe the water boundary line, and when applicable, describe any limitations to ownership. (2 points each)

